---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Cyclic Subgroups"
date:   2023-09-22 01:00:00 -0500
categories: maths
katex: True
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
author: "Ryan Wans"
comments: True
---
Observing the behavior of cyclic subgroups are various groups. 
<!--more-->

---
<br>

While studying algebra, I found myself very confused about the initial definition of the order of an element $g$ in a group $G$. We are given that $\|g\|$ is the smallest possible $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $g^n = e$ for multiplicative operations or $ng = e$ for additive operations. Without any knowledge of cyclicity, this definition seems rather arbitrary. I will introduce the concept of cyclic subgroups and how they relate to the order of an element. This is merely a collection of notes from the course that helped to give me an intuitive understanding of the topic.

<blockquote>
<b>Theorem.</b> (Cyclic Subgroups) Let $G$ be a group and $a \in G$. Then the set $\langle a \rangle = \{a^n \mid n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ is a subgroup of $G$.
</blockquote>

We will denote a subgroup as $\langle g \rangle \leqslant G$. Of course, $\langle g \rangle$ will inhereit all of the properties of a subgroup and the binary operation of $G$. It is easy to conduct the one-step test in this case: 

<proof>
<i>Proof.</i> We know that $\langle a \rangle \neq \varnothing$ since $a \in \langle a \rangle$. Given that some $a^n, a^m \in \langle a \rangle$, we show that $a^n(a^m)^{-1} = a^{n-m} \in \langle a \rangle$. Thus $\langle a \rangle \leqslant G$.
<end>$\blacksquare$</end>
</proof>

Now that we know what defines a cyclic subgroup, we can examine the behavior of these subgroups in various groups. As the name implies, repeatedly apply the operation of $G$ onto elements in the subgroup will eventually cycle back to the identity element. The amount of times this operation must be applied in order to reach $e$ is the order of the element. Let's examine this in the context of $U(10)$, or the set of $$\{ k \in \mathbb{Z} \mid \text{gcd}(k, 10) = 1 \}$$ under multiplication $\text{mod}\ 10$.

<blockquote>
<b>Example.</b> Suppose we have some $\langle 3 \rangle \leqslant U(10)$ where $U(10) \coloneqq \{ 1, 3, 7, 9 \}$. We see that
$$
\begin{align*}
3^1 &= 3 \mod 10 &= 3 \\ 
3^2 &= 9 \mod 10 &= 9 \\ 
3^3 &= 27 \mod 10 &= 7 \\
3^4 &= 81 \mod 10 &= 1 \\
3^5 &= 3^4 \cdot 3^1 \mod 10 &= 3 \\
\end{align*}
$$
Thus, performing the operation of $G$ onto the elements of $\langle 3 \rangle$ yeilds us the identity element after 4 operations. Thus, $|3| = 4$. What happens if we perform the inverse operation?
$$
\begin{align*}
3^{-1} &= 7 \mod 10 &= 7 \\
3^{-2} &= 3^{-1} \cdot 3^{-1} \mod 10 &= 9 \\
3^{-3} &= 3^{-2} \cdot 3^{-1} \mod 10 &= 3 \\
3^{-4} &= 3^{-2} \cdot 3^{-2} \mod 10 &= 1 \\
\end{align*}
$$
One can see that have now traversed the same cycle, but in reverse. Thus, $|3| = 4$. Note that the sets of $\langle 3 \rangle$ of $U(10)$ are of the same order and elements, but are not isomorphic since the ordering of elements differs. 
</blockquote>

It is probably obvious now that cyclic groups are also inherently Abelian. Another subgroup that exhibits very similar behavior but under the operation of addition is $\langle 2 \rangle \leqslant \mathbb{Z}_{10}$. Let's look at another subgroup with slightly less trivial behavior. 

<blockquote>
<b>Example.</b> Suppose we have some $\langle -1 \rangle \leqslant \mathbb{Z}$. It is clear that each entry in the subgroup will be a distinct integer. Thus, $|-1| = \infty$.
</blockquote>

Intruiging. Perhaps we have discerned an interesting property of cyclic subgroups at this point. 

<blockquote>
<b>Definition.</b> For some cyclic subgroup $\langle a \rangle \leqslant G$, we have that $|a| = |\langle a \rangle|$. That is, the order of the subgroup group generated by $g$ is equal to the order of $g$ itself. 
</blockquote>

It is convenient to think of $\langle a \rangle \leqslant G$ as the smallest subset of $G$ containing $a$. 