---
layout: post
title:  "Interesting Property of Binomial Distributions"
date:   2024-02-08 01:00:00 -0500
categories: maths
katex: True
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
author: "Ryan Wans"
comments: True
---
Observing the behavior of $B(n, p)$ for $np \in \mathbb{Z}$.
<!--more-->

---
<br>

While studying, I stumbled upon this interesting quality of the binomial distribution. 

<blockquote>
<b>Proposition.</b> Given $X \sim B(n, p)$ and $np \in \mathbb{Z}$, we have that 
$$
\mathbb{E}[X] = \text{Median}(X) = \text{Mode}(X) = np.
$$
</blockquote>

This is a very interesting property of the binomial distribution. It is clear that the expected value of $X$ is $np$, but the fact that the median and mode are also $np$ is quite intriguing. I will provide a proof of this proposition... eventually. My guess is that the case where $p \in \mathbb{Z}$ is trivial, but I will have to think about the case where $p \notin \mathbb{Z}$. ~~Updates to come~~. 

I now have a proof for this. An outline was originaly provided in $[1]$ from what I believe to be from the '90s. A mistake arises in the proof, which the author recognizes in $[2]$ but has not corrected. I will provide a corrected proof. This problem was introduced to me by Boyan Zhang, and his corrections will also follow.

<proof>
<i>Proof.</i> 
We will start by examining the case for $0 < p < 1$, and evaluate the boundary points at the end. First, we define the mode for any distribution 

$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\text{Mode}(X) = \max_{k\in\text{Supp}(X)}\left\{ \P{X = k} \right\}.
$$

We will use a ratio of consecutive probabilities as used in $[1]$ to prove that $k = np$ has the largest probability. Let $k \in \text{Supp}(X)$ and $q = 1 - p$. We have that
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
    \frac{\P{X = k}}{\P{X = k - 1}} \equiv 
    \frac{\displaystyle \binom{n}{k}p^kq^{n-k}}{\displaystyle \binom{n}{k-1}p^{k-1}q^{n-k+1}} = 
    \frac{(k-1)p}{kq}.
$$
When $k \leq np$ this value is greater than 1, and when $k \geq np + 1$ it is less than 1. In other words, values before and after $np$ are less likely to occur, meaning $np$ has the largest probability. Thus, we have that $\text{Mode}(X) = np$, as confirmed in $[1]$.  We continue into the portion of the proof which is flawed; establishing the median. The median of any distribution is given by the value $k$ for which
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\P{X \geq k} \geq \frac{1}{2},\quad \P{X \leq k} \geq \frac{1}{2}.
$$
This can be interpreted as the point $k$ at which the probability of $n$ being greater than or less than $k$ is equal, and equal to one half. Observe the following;
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\sum_{r=0}^{np}\P{X = r} = \sum_{r=0}^{n(p-q)}\P{X = r} + \sum_{k=1}^{nq}\P{X = np - k + 1}. \tag{1}
$$
We are splitting the discrete sum $0 \to np$ into $0 \to n(p-q) > 0$ and $n(p-q) + 1 \to np$. 
<blockquote>
<b>Claim 1.1.</b> We make that claim that, given $p \geq q$,

$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\P{X = np + k} < \P{X = np - k + 1}
$$
for some $k \in [1, nq]$. 
</blockquote>

Given this, it would then follow from equation $(1)$ that
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\sum_{r=0}^{np}\P{X = r} > \sum_{k=1}^{nq}\P{X = np + k} = \sum_{r=np+1}^n \P{X = r}, \tag{2}
$$
which is equivalent to proving the first half of the median condition. It is at this point in the original proof that they swap $p \leftrightarrow q$ and claim that the second half of the median condition is satisfied. This, however, fails since the proof of <b>Claim 1.1</b> hinges on $p \geq q$. Thus $[1]$ has effectively only proven the case for $p = q = 1/2$. The goal was to show that,
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\sum_{r=np}^n \P{X = r} > \sum_{r=0}^{np-1} \P{X = r},
$$
which would complete the proof for the median. Attempting to swap $p \leftrightarrow q$ results in,
$$
\renewcommand{\P}[1]{\mathbb{P}\left[ #1 \right]}
\sum_{r=0}^{nq}\P{X = r} = \boxed{\sum_{r=0}^{n(q-p)}\P{X = r}} + \sum_{k = 1}^{np}\P{X = nq - k + 1}, \\ 
\sum_{r=0}^{nq}\P{X = r} = \sum_{k = 1}^{np}\P{X = nq - k + 1}.
$$
We can no longer apply <b>Claim 1.1</b> to the second equality to make it into the goal form aforementioned. Moreover, the boxed sum in this case is strictly zero, whereas in the original case it was greater than or equal to zero. 
<end>$\blacksquare$</end>
</proof>